Gold trading FAQs
What are the most popular gold ETFs to trade?
Some of the most popular gold ETFs to trade are SPDR Gold Shares (GLD), iShares Gold Trust (IAU) and Aberdeen Standard Physical Swiss Gold Shares ETF (SGOL), but there are other options available. These ETFs aim to track the price of gold and provide investors with exposure to the commodity without the need to own physical gold. 

How do I get started with trading gold?
To start trading gold, you must decide what type of gold investment you want to trade and develop a strategy. For online trading, choose a broker, open a trading account and deposit funds. If you want to trade physical gold, you can find a reputable online gold dealer. It's essential to research the gold market and understand the factors that affect the price of gold before making any trades.

What are some risks associated with trading gold?
Some risks include volatility, geopolitical and liquidity risks, depending on your investment type. To minimize losses, you can use risk management strategies, such as setting stop-loss orders, diversifying your portfolio and using leverage responsibly. You should also stay informed about market news and events that may affect the price of gold and adjust your trading strategy accordingly. 

Is copper a precious metal?
Although copper is an important industrial commodity that is used to manufacture goods ranging from car exhaust systems to plumbing pipes, it is not a precious metal as defined by the IRS for gold IRA investing.

What is the best gold IRA?
What qualifies a company as the "best" gold IRA is highly subjective and is ultimately decided by your personal financial situation and retirement saving goals. Gold IRAs are best for sophisticated investors with experience buying and selling precious metals. It's smart to avoid any gold investment company that uses high-pressure sales pitches or scare tactics as engaging with those companies could mean you could wind up with an investment that doesn't fit your goals or encountering scams. Make sure to diversify your portfolio and mitigate risk.

How do I open a gold IRA?
Start by researching guides such as this one to find the best gold IRA company for your needs. Once you choose a company, they will help you establish and fund your new IRA, most likely via a rollover from another IRA. A direct transfer of funds will ensure that you don't have negative tax consequences.

What is a precious metals IRA?
The term "gold IRA" tends to be the most popular, but a gold IRA — or a silver IRA, for that matter — is the same as a precious metals IRA. These are classified by the IRS as self-directed IRAs, which are a specific category of tax-deferred retirement accounts that let you invest in alternative assets such as physical precious metals, real estate or cryptocurrency.

How do I invest in precious metals?
There are multiple ways to invest in precious metals. One option is to do so via gold IRA. You can also buy physical precious metals outside of an IRA, or you can invest in gold-backed assets — stocks, mutual funds or ETFs that hold physical gold or stocks of gold companies. There are also gold futures contracts and other derivatives that professional traders use to hedge their positions, but those aren't recommended for retail investors because of their complexity and the potential for outsized losses.

Is gold a good investment?
Gold has been sought after throughout history as a store of value. Today, it can be useful as a hedge against market volatility and high inflation. The best gold investment will depend very much on your personal finances, your retirement plan timeline and your risk tolerance. Investing in gold has both advantages and disadvantages.

What is IRA gold?
There are many different types of coins and bars the IRS has approved as IRA-eligible, but there are stringent standards. The IRS has approved many different coins and bars manufactured by the U.S. Mint, other national mints as well as certain private mints as IRA-eligible. IRS rules also stipulate that you can't keep IRA gold at home, and you can't put collectibles in an IRA.

What are other ways to own gold?

A self-directed gold IRA can give you peace of mind if you want to hold physical assets, but if you want the diversification of precious metals without the hassle and expense of a gold IRA, you can also invest in gold ETFs, gold mutual funds and stocks of gold-mining companies. Learn everything you need to know about the different ways to own gold in this guide.

Many of these investments can be easily bought with an ordinary brokerage account, and — depending on your retirement plan administrator — might even be available within a regular 401(k) or similar type of account.